David Stanley Leitch (9 January 1923 – 18 January 1988) was an Australian politician. He was the Country Party member for Armidale in the New South Wales Legislative Assembly from 1973 to 1978.

Leitch was born in Leeton; his maternal grandfather was William Killen, a member of the Australian House of Representatives from 1922 to 1931. Leitch was educated by correspondence from All Saints College in Bathurst. He studied medicine at the University of Sydney and was subsequently appointed an honorary surgeon to the Armidale and New England Hospital. In 1942 he enlisted in the AIF; he was posted to New Guinea, where he fought the Japanese at Shaggy Ridge. After his return he returned to his medical practice.[1]

In 1973, the Country Party member for Armidale, Davis Hughes, resigned to accept the post of Agent-General in London. Leitch was one of two Country Party candidates for the by-election, in which he narrowly defeated the Labor candidate. He held the seat at the 1973 and 1976 elections, but he was defeated in 1978 by Labor candidate Bill McCarthy.[2]

Leitch died in 1988 in Armidale.[1]

The New South Wales Legislative Assembly is the lower of the two houses of the Parliament of New South Wales, an Australian state. The upper house is the New South Wales Legislative Council. Both the Assembly and Council sit at Parliament House in the state capital, Sydney. The Assembly is presided over by the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly.

The Assembly has 93 members, elected by single-member constituency, which are commonly known as seats. Voting is by the optional preferential system.[1]


NSW first Legislative Assembly – 1880
Members of the Legislative Assembly have the post-nominals MP after their names.[2] From the creation of the assembly up to about 1990, the post-nominals "MLA" (Member of the Legislative Assembly) were used.

The Assembly is often called the bearpit on the basis of the house's reputation for confrontational style during heated moments and the "savage political theatre and the bloodlust of its professional players"[3] attributed in part to executive dominance.[4]

7	Notes
8	References
9	External links
History

The Legislative Assembly chamber during debate on the Greater Newcastle Bill, 19 November 1937; Speaker Reginald Weaver presiding with the Member for Newcastle, Frank Hawkins speaking.
The Legislative Assembly was created in 1856 with the introduction of a bicameral parliament for the Crown Colony of New South Wales.[5] In the beginning, only men were eligible to be members of the Assembly, and only around one half of men were able to pass the property or income qualifications required to vote. Two years later, the Electoral Reform Act, which was passed despite the opposition of the Legislative Council, saw the introduction of a far more democratic system, allowing any man who had been resident in the colony for six months the right to vote, and removing property requirements to stand as a candidate.[5] Following Australia's federation in 1901, the New South Wales parliament became a State legislature. Women were granted the right to vote in 1902, and gained the right to be members of the Assembly in 1918,[6] with the first successful candidate being elected in 1925.[7]